What is the Next Step for IETF YANG?

IETF Side Meeting
IETF-105, Montreal, Canada
Tuesday 23 July
8.30am

Note Well applies covering IPR etc.

Session Chaired by GengLiang
Minutes: Adrian Farrel and Daniel King

Slides are available through a link to github on the Side Meeting wiki page
https://github.com/sunseawq/IETF-YANG-side-meeting/

Agenda 

1. YANG Model Status Update, Problem statement. (GengLiang 10 minutes)
2. What have already been done for IETF YANG. (Qin Wu 20 minutes)
 o YANG Catalog Project Update in IETF
 o YANG Data model Interconnection Framework Development in IETF
 o Telefonica SDN Architecture and Model Usage
 o China YANG Round Table meeting Update (Reach out to China Operator Community)
3. Open Discussion Questions (30 minutes)

- There was one change to the published Agenda, a late submission from Telefonica 

1. YANG Model Status Update, Problem statement. (GengLiang 10 minutes)
Geng Liang introduces the meeting and the questions to be considered.
Geng Liang presents an overview of where we are so far and what the gap is. We will return to the list after the presentations. 

2. What have already been done for IETF YANG. (Qin Wu 20 minutes)
Qin Wu presenting what is being done to address the gap

Comments during this section: 

Douglas Hurler - What is the pain point? Interop, or people will not use models not built in IETF?
Qin - Explains why separate device and service model approaches (bottom up versus top down). Implies need for a translation mechanism
Douglas - So this is a fundamental YANG model issue, not just missing augmentations?
Qin - Yes. It may mean we need a framework.

Telefonica presentation (Luis presents on behalf of Oscar) which was a late addition
Luis from Telefonica (and on behalf of Oscar) discussing their planned SDN architecture


Acee - highlighting the different models used in the architecture, both service and device. 

Robin Li - Is this Telefonica research, products, or open source
Luis - We can't do much development ourselves, so rely on industrial products and open source via an innovator. Requirement for

Charles Eckel - TAPI from ONF and also YANG for northbound. Where do ONF and YANG fit in
Luis - ONF northbound of controller. Some gluing is needed

Xuifeng - This architecture is comprehensive. You seem to use lots of alternatives to IETF YANG models and not use the IETF much
Luis - We are taking the mature models

Sonum Mathur - For SBI you using Netconf an GNMI. Why? Was it challenging?
Luis - Need to defer to Oscar and we will take this offline
Xuifeng - Understandable because GNMI supports telemetry and YANG push wasn't ready


= Open Discussion

Geng Liang summarises questions highlighted at the start of the session.

Acee Lindem - We were struggling with "one size fits all", but then invented schema mount.
We do a lot of model writing, but it is like compiling code but never running it

Ignas Bogdonas - One question not asked "Why is open config accepted in the industry but IETF models are not?"
The IETF not good at working on systems, but this is what we need in this case.
Need a "release" of components that work together
E.g. Connect A to B, there are many layers which might have individual models. Question is whether those models match together.
E.g. PW model makes assumptions that are incompatible with other models
What is need is a move away from developing individual models and to develop systems
If we talk to Ops community they still ask "why should we use YANG? what are the benefits? how to integrate with existing tools?"
Not a technical problem, more of a coordination problem

Geng - IETF is typically bottom up. Hence IETF YANG models are considered as not systematic
Can we do anything in the IETF? Can we make a DT of operators to take systematic approach?

Ignas - IETF must (not should) do something
1. Education: we explain how we think this should work
2. Models for everything: IETF assumes all manageability can be solved with models, but needs component in between for technical and policy-deployment reasons
3. Try to understand how operators us components to build services
4. Shoot for 80% not 100% and get something shipped
E.g. BGP router ID does not need to be in a YANG model, it is configured just once. BGP policy needs to be configured very often. We should focus on the things that need frequent config.

Henk - YANG push DT had a side product. Everyone knew telemetry was coming
There is an I-D "Generalise network control automation YANG model" - https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-bryskin-netconf-automation-yang - by Igor Bryskin
There is a simple event/action condition concept in this framework, and this may be useful in this context
It could be a building block and help with some of issues identified today. 

Qin Wu - Similar model has been proposed in netmod to address the gap. Take offline.
Qin Wu - Problem is the mess of the southbound device model

Geng - Instead of focus on test and field trial, operators can provide lab environment

Rob Wilton - not sure IETF is right place for service level YANG models
Maybe MEF is a better place
Charles - not sure. MEF didn't have the YANG expertise. But IETF may not have the right ops people. Need to work together
Mahesh - Did do some models in MEF for eLAN etc. Doing some SDWAN modeling (but not in YANG). Have not got traction in industry
Rob - need service models to sit together with device models. But cannot standarise mapping - there is a need for secret source in the operator
IETF YANG not getting traction because of "cost". Huge cost to adding YANG to existing management systems

Robin Li
1. IETF good at components, and operators OK with these components
2. IETF could be good at architecture - We have IAB and we must set up architecture view
Perhaps use hackathon or opens source to show how this can all work
Coordination with operational community is important, but maybe this is not IETF work. But IETF should do educational work

Ignas
Green/brown field. Dominant model is CLI templates. i.e., Ops community is defining a modeling language that is not standard, but delivers. Hence discussion is more about this than about YANG
Operators don't come to IETF. Period. Hence IETF must outreach

Xuifeng - OpenConfig is not compatible with IETF. Need to do something!

Qin. We don't want to standardise mapping. That is secret juice, but we can define different level model.

Luis for Oscar - "OpenConfig is for responsive to changes and is more mature"

Geng summarises the discussion from today and will set up email list



